Henry Post, hpost@hawk.iit.edu

(This can be public)

# 09-04 Short Essay

In this short essay, I will examine programming as a technology that contains a
variety of political, socioeconomic, and historic factors that affect how
current demographics of women and minorities in programming jobs are
represented.

Programming is one of the few professions that can be performed completely
remotely. It has no **explicit** requirements for race, gender, sex, or physical
abilities. Its only hard requirements are a human and a human-computer
interface, like a laptop. It seems like the field that no discrimination could
take place in.

However, one of the largest social issues in technology of this generation is a
lack of women in computing. Why is this?

Programming used to actually be a mainly female job, around the 1940s-50s, with
large amounts of women working for universities and governments, including NASA.
At this time, programming was perceived as "women's work" and received very
little pay or honors.

It was in the 1960s and beyond that programming shifted to be male work, with
employers targeting men in ads and preferring to hire men for programming.

This technology mainly discriminates currently because of the people who exist
within its ecosystem who deter minorities who wish to join.

There is a smaller economic barrier to joining programming as low-cost computers
such as Raspberry Pis or Linux netbooks will allow poorer people to create code,
and there is a plethora of learning resources available that one can use to
learn.

An intersectional analysis of this technology would have to examine educational
programs that are given to disadvantaged black communities and the culture
within white male technology groups, specifically how they can deter minorities
from joining tecnical fields.

We would want to look at poor black communities and their educational programs,
the resources afforded to poor black schools versus richer ones, and how that
affects engagement in and understanding of programming as a profession.

In addition to this, we would need to see why women and minorities are deterred from joining the programming field, and tech fields as a whole.

This essay allows us to look at a technology (programming) that has a very large
potential to be an 'egalitarian' technology in that it has no apparently
inherent political or social bias, but one which still discriminates.

I believe that the main reason that programming as a field of work discriminates
is for social reasons that have to do with the culture that people inside the
field have.

I believe there are as also some economic reasons for women and minorities being
a minority in programming fields as compared to social reasons, but opportunity
and the cost and time of pursuing education is definitely a factor. The largest
factor may be the cost of a college education when looking at economic reasons
for this.

## Outline/Brainstorm

1.  What tech did I choose and why?

    I chose programming/IT work because it is the field that I want to work in,
    and the field that has very small amounts of minorities in it in the United
    States.

    I want to choose this field because there are tools and knowledge that are
    harder to obtain if you come from a disadvantaged background.

    There are also social factors (social barriers) that can deter one from
    entering this field.

2.  Can my tech be stripped of its politics without being completely redesigned
    or destroyed? What would that look like?



#
